# Statistics

## Data types
- Numeric
- Categorical

### Numeric (Quantitative) Data 
- Continuous: when there is no clear distinction between any two levels or there are too many levels! Examples may be height, and weight, because we can't say there is any boundary between any 2 levels of weight 176, 176.1, 176.22, 176.1523 ... also age has a lot of levels except you are dealing with specific age groups like teenagers or toddlers. Ages can vary from 0 to over 100!
- Count data (AKA discrete data): refers to data that has clear boundaries and not too many levels. Examples may be the number of church services in a week, age for toddlers (1, 2 or 3), teenagers age (13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18 or 19)
- Rule of thumb for what too many levels mean? - > 10. But this is flexible and based on your definition.

### Categorical (Qualitative) data
These can be divided in a few ways.
- Binary and Non-binary: If there are two levels only or more than two levels. You may ask what of one level? That's also non-binary.
- Nominal and Ordinal data: **Nominal** data refers to named data with no inherent order except, perhaps, alphabetical order. Examples would be things like name, occupation, race, or gender. **Ordinal** data on the other hand refers to categorical data with inherent order like temperature description (cold, warm, hot) or academic performance (poor, average, good, excellent) or highest education attained (kindergarten, elementary school, middle school, high school, college, graduate school) or a Likert scale (very unlikely, unlikely, likely, very likely). With ordinal data, the values belong to various levels.

## What to do when you just receive data 
- Understand the context of the data
- Understand the source of the data
- Look for documentation about the data

## Let's talk data
- the easiest way to think of data is in the form that we see in spreadsheets -  two-dimensional with rows and columns

| id | firstname | lastname | age | sex | income | state |company| qualification |
|----|-----------|----------|-----|-----|--------|-------|-------|-----|
|1. | Joshua    | Terry    | 45  | male| 2300  | MD | 1 | K
|2. | Sarah     | Collins  | 32  | Female| 4200| TX | 3 | N
|3. | Aisha     | Ahmed  | 38  | female| 1232| IL |  | H
|4. | Nguyen     | Li  | 28  | M| 2200| NY | 1 | M
|5. | Matthew     | Nguza  | 40  | MALE| 1100| CA | 2 | C
|6. | Philomena     | Okereke  | 33  | Fimale| 760| TX | 1 | G
|7. | Kiromera     | Ndwapi  | 320  | Female| 4200| TX |  | G
|8. | Sarah     | Collins  | 31  | female| 1380| MD | 2 | 
|9. | Adewale     |   | 53  | Mail| 2300| NY | 3 | C
|10. | Rukevwe     | Oghenetega  | 33  | Female| 2302| NY | 2 | 
|11. | Danladi     | Shehu  | 32  | | 5210| MD | 2 | C
|12. | Krishna     | Rhaman  | 29  | Male| 980| CA | 1 | H

- Depending on the data source it may require cleaning.

## Types of Data analysis
- Descriptive (Exploratory) or diasgnostic
- Predictive or prognostic


# Exploratory data analysis
- Above we see a data set with 9 columns (id, firstname, lastname, age, sex, income, state, company, and qualification) and we see 12 rows each bearing the record for one person.

- When we receive a dataset we want to know first of all how many **variables** (columns) and how many **observations** (rows)
- From the variables we want to identify which:
    + Numeric
    + Categorical
