# Probability Theory
- What is probability?
- Population = every single person
- Sample a group selected from a population
- The concept comes form frequencies. When we know the frequencies, proportion and percentages we can infer that if there is a random selection from a population we will obtain proportions in a sample that are similar to what we find in the population.

## Probability Rules 

### Rule 1:  
$0 \le P(X) \le 1$

All probabililties are greater than or equal to zero and less than or equal to one.

### Rule 2:
$\sum_{i=1}^{i=n}{P(X_i)} = 1$

The sum of all probabilities in a given sample set = 1

### Rule 3 (the compliment rule):
$P(A) = 1 - P(A^c)$

It there are only 2 probabilities in a system, then if we know one we can determine the other since they ordinaily will add up to one. The probability of an event happening is equal to one minus the probability of the event not happening.

### Two way (contingency) table

|    | Mex | Can |
|----|-----|-----|
|Boy | 11  |  13 |
|Girl| 10  |  16 |

- The total number of students in this class = $11+13+10+16 = 50$
- In this table we find a total of 50 students of which 24 are boys. The probability of being a boy in this class, $P(Boy)$, is therefore $24/50 = 0.48$ or $48\%$. 
- Similarly the probability of being a girl, $P(Girl)$, is $26/50 = 0.52$ or $52\%$. 
- The probability of being Mexican, $P(Mex)$, is $21/50 = 0.42$ or $42\%$ and
- The probability of being Canadian, $P(Can)$, is $29/50 = 0.58$ or $58\%$.
- These probabilities are called **marginal probabilities** because they can be written in the margins.

|    | Mex | Can   |       |
|----|-----|-------|-------|
|Boy |  11  |  13  | **24**|
|Girl|  10  |  16  | **26**|
|    |**21**|**29**|       |

- The probability of being a Mexican boy, same as saying probability of being a Mexican and being a boy at the same time, $P(Mex\cap{Boy})$, is $11/50 = 0.22$ or $22\%$. Here the cap symbol is called *intersection*.
- The probability of being a Canadian boy, $P(Can\cap{Boy})$ will be $13/50 = 0.26$ or $26\%$.
- The probability of being a Mexican girl, $P(Mex\cap{Boy})$, is $10/50 = 0.2$ or $20\%$.
- The probability of being a Canadian girl, $P(Can\cap{Girl})$ is $16/50 = 0.32$ or $32\%$
- These are referred to as **joint probabilities**. This makes sense as they are based on the intersection of two probabilities.



### Rule 4 (unions):
$P(A\cup{B}) = P(A) + P(B) - P(A\cap{B})$
- Lets take our contingency table for example again.
- Lets consider the probability of being a Mexican or a boy written as $P(Mex\cup{Boy})$, where the cup symbol is called *union*

|    | Mex | Can   |
|----|-----|-------|
|Boy |  **11**  |  **13**  |
|Girl|  **10**  |  16 | 

$34/50 = 0.68$ or $68\%$ but this is same as $42 + 48 - 22 = 68$   so we see the rule is correct.

### Rule 5 (intersection)

##### Conditional Probabilities
$P(A\cap{B}) = P(A) * P(B|A)$ or $P(B) * P(A|B)$

##### Independence
$P(A|B) = P(A)$
- This means $P(A\cap{B}) = P(A) * P(B)$

### Conditional probabilities
|    | Mex | Can |
|----|-----|-----|
|Boy | 11  |  13 |
|Girl| 10  |  16 |

- $P(Mex|Boy)$ is read as probability of being Mexican given a boy. This just means probability of being a Mexican among boys.
- We see from this that we are interested in only boys hence our population is the boys in the class.
- Probability of being Mexican among boys will then be $11/24 = 0.46$ or $46\%$. We can from this infer the probability of being Canadian among boys = $1-P(Mex) = 1 - 0.46 = 0.54$ or $54\%$
- We can also determine the proability of being a boy among Mexicans. $P(Boy|Mex) = 11/21 = 0.52$ or $52%$
- We see conditional probabilites add up to $100\%$ within a particular level.
- We can thus describe conditonal probabilities adding up to marginal totals as row or column probabilities or percentages.
